As this story continues, I shall have to speak again,
and at length,  of this creature and record his
speech.  I confess I find it very difficult to do so
because  I could not say now, as I could never understand
then, what  language he spoke. It was not Latin, in which 
the lettered  men of the monastery expressed 
themselves, it was not the vulgar tongue  of those 
parts, or any other I had ever  heard. I believe I 
have given a faint idea of his manner of speech, reporting 
just now (as I remember them) the first words of 
his I heard. When I learned later about his adventurous
life and about the various places where he had lived,
putting  down roots in none of them, I realized Salvatore 
spoke all languages, and no language. Or, rather,
he had invented for himself a language which used
the sinews of the languages to which he had been
exposed—and once I thought that his was, not the
Adamic language that a happy mankind had spoken,
all united by a single tongue from the origin of
the world to the Tower of Babel, or one of the
languages that arose after the dire event of their
division, but precisely the Babelish language of
the first day after the divine chastisement, the
language of primeval confusion. Nor, for that
matter, could I call Salvatore’s speech a
language, because in every human language there
are rules and every term signifies ad placitum a
thing, according to a law that does not change,
for man cannot call the dog once dog and once cat,
or utter sounds to which a consensus of people has
not assigned a definite meaning, as would happen
if someone said the word “blitiri” And yet,
one way or another, I did understand what
Salvatore meant, and so did the others. Proof that
he spoke not one, but all languages, none
correctly, taking words sometimes from one and
sometimes from another. I also noticed afterward
that he might refer to something first in Latin
and later in Provençal, and I realized that he
was not so much inventing his own sentences as
using the disiecta membra of other sentences,
heard some time in the past, according to the
present situation and the things he wanted to say,
as if he could speak of a food, for instance, only
with the words of the people among whom he had
eaten that food, and express his joy only with
sentences that he had heard uttered by joyful
people the day when he had similarly experienced
joy. His speech was somehow like his face, put
together with pieces from other people’s faces,
or like some precious reliquaries I have seen (si
licet magnis componere parva, if I may link
diabolical things with the divine), fabricated
from the shards of other holy objects. At that
moment, when I met him for the first time,
Salvatore seemed to me, because of both his face
and his way of speaking, a creature not unlike the
hairy and hoofed hybrids I had just seen under the
portal. Later I realized that the man was probably
good-hearted and humorous. Later still ... But we
must not get ahead of our story. Particularly
since, the moment he had spoken, my master
questioned him with great curiosity. 
